From Hanselman it's dot com
is Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 65. Recorded
live Thursday, June 18, 2009.
Support for Hanselman it's as
provided by Tellerik Reb controllers.
The most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers
journal the world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott talks legacy code
with Michael feathers. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman, and this
is another episode of Hansel
minutes. I'm here in Oslo,
Norway at the Norwegian developers
conference, and I'm sitting down
in a reasonably quiet conference
room with Michael feathers, the
author of working effectively with
legacy code who works for
object mentor, and he knows
all sorts of things that
I don't know. So I
said, I got to jump
at the chance to talk
to you. So thanks for
sitting down. Yeah, thanks a
lot. I'm really enjoying the
conference here and so great
venue and lots of interesting
speakers, You know, and as
with all conferences, it feels
like the really interesting things
happen in the hallways and
happened between conference sessions and
uncle Bob was talking about
something and the guys were,
were brainstorming that someone was
saying that they like to
select chunks of code and
within a long method, something
that's maybe legacy code and
they like to go extract
method using their refactoring tool
of choice. And then that
gives them a sense of
what the inputs and outputs
for that block are. Yeah,
but in a method that
maybe has three or four
inputs that might be inputs,
as far as parameters into
the method that might show
them that they're really reaching
outside the method and looking
at global variables, if it's
of context. And that all
seemed very klugey to me
that maybe this person should
be using a different kind
of programming language. I mean,
they were basically saying there's
a lot of sites Effects
that can happen. Yeah. Yeah.
I think that's a thing
that we have to go
and really ask ourselves very
seriously in the industry right
now, the, I spent a
lot of time helping people
with, you know, really ratty
code basis trying to go
and recover, you know, and
it's not atypical to have
these big 3000 line methods
and you have to go
and try to figure out
how to break them down
and do various things. One
of the things that I
noticed is that side effects,
you know, are really a
big deal. If you didn't
really have to reason through
side effects, you could basically
basically make a lot of
change much more effectively and
much more, much easier. So
it just kinda makes me
wonder, you know, it seems
like we are making, moving
the industry towards functional programming
languages. And some of the
dabbling that I've done with
functional programming languages has really
kind of led me to
believe that this could be
a bit of an answer.
I mean, it's not going
to be a complete panacea
because there's, there are always
problems in development, but it
seems like if we can
get a control of the
side effects situation, we might
be able to go and
do some really cool stuff.
Now for those listeners who
may not be, you know,
into this stuff and be
really understanding it, we're talking
about a way of programming
that involves not changing something
that's, you know, not changing
a variable that then you
wouldn't have expected to get
changed. I mean, how can
we, you maybe explain that
to Functional programming. One is
it functions are like first
class citizens, so you can
pass functions to other functions.
The thing that's really important
for us, like in this
conversation though really is the
immutability aspect. The notion that
you really are working with
Constance all the time, whenever
you have a variable, you
don't really reassign to it.
You just go ahead and
construct a new variable based
upon the previous value and,
you know, do something computationally
to produce that new value.
You know, one thing I
noticed over and over again
said, when you're looking at
very long methods, it's the
temporaries that get you. Okay.
And when you have temporary
variables inside the, the method
and people are going in
randomly updating them in various
different places, those temporaries are
just really kind of like
a glue that make it
really very hard to go
and extract out pieces and,
and you make separate methods
out of them. It's just
really hard to reason through
all that nonsense. You know,
when you have a mutable
data, then you're constantly constructing
new values and you're able
to, to see, you know,
like you were saying earlier,
exactly what comes in and
exactly what goes out and,
and your reasoning is easier
recently. It's easier, not only
for you, but also for
tool that needs to figure
out what you can really
extract a method or not.
Your book is about legacy
code, but it's sometimes I
feel like legacy code is
code I wrote last week.
Well, yeah. Then you're really
in tune with the definition
in the book in a
way it's funny. I was
trying, I kept trying to
find a decent title for
the book when I was
writing it. And I kept
coming back to the notion
of legacy code. I have
a friend named Eric Mead
and I called him up
one time. He was doing
a gig with a new
client. And I said, you
know, so how was the
day to day? And he
says, Oh man, they're writing
legacy code, The writing legacy
creating. Yeah. And I mean,
that really struck me that,
you know, there's the dictionary
definition of legacy code, which
is Cody yacht from somebody
else. But there's also this
definition that we also feel
informally, which is it's just
code. You may have just
written it yesterday, but it's
just intractable. It's really hard
to work with. So, you
know, Why is it intractable?
I mean, nobody wants to
admit that they're the kind
of person that would create
legacy code and they might
say, well, I inherited the
system. I'm only able to
write legacy code given the
constraints of this. Yeah. It's
really a bit of a
fallacy though. You can always
in an old code base,
make fresh, starts with the
new things that you write
and you have to be
really, you know, you always
have a choice between going
and adding five lines to
an existing method and, you
know, creating a new method
that you delegate out to,
you know, doing things where
you have, you know, smaller
structure and clearer simpler structure
and moving forward with tests
and that sort of thing.
It it's tough because, you
know, in the existing code,
you, you know, you're, you're
surrounded by badness, right. But
you know, it pays to
learn design principles to learn
good things about code structuring
and make fresh starts and
an existing code base. Am
I always going to find
myself though, spackling over something?
You know, it's like, you
know, when you buy an
old house and you say,
well, it needs a fresh
coat of paint and you
know, you put a couple
of coats of paint or
something, but you'll always know
that there's mold and nastiness
in the wall. Well, you
know, I think the truth
of the matter is that
for many large existing systems,
you're never going to escape,
you know, the, the, the
structure that you built up
over the years, you know,
but you, you can build
new abstractions. You know, there's
a really cool pattern. That's
been written up on the
net called strangler application and
strangler strangler application choke someone
to death. Yeah. And the
idea is that if you
have this big hulking massive
legacy code, what you can
do is you can say,
look, if we have events
coming into the system, we
can do so we can
divert some of those events
to something which is really
like a new system. And
then the outputs from that
end up going and being
pushed out with a normal
outputs. So taking certain things
that come in and kind
of diverting them off into
this auxiliary structure, which is
this new architecture that you're
building up slowly with with
better structuring. And, you know,
that can be good, but
sometimes it just really ever
becomes a complete thing. You're
just building a secondary pathway
in your application that allows
you to do things in
a better way. Why is
it called strangler? I don't
understand that. Well, cause it's
kind of like you, it's
kinda like a, a vine,
a kudzu or something like
that. It's kind of like
growing, you know, over the
application and sapping and strength,
but becoming, you know, the
thing itself, divine becomes the
stronger thing. So it's kind
of strangling the existing structure
and imposing constraints on this.
Well, your what's, your, your
hope is, is that the
older pieces really just not
end up going and doing
things functionally for you, all
the functionality used to the
newer thing. Yeah. The system
around it that strangles, the
old system forces it to
change or to go away.
Yeah. And that's, that's one
strategy. Another strategy is to
essentially just, you know, keep,
you know, creating new classes
and building new structure in
the existing application without trying
to go and create a
parallel pathway a third. And
the third way of approaching
things is to take a
big area of code and
try to go and write
enough tests for it so
that you feel that you
can go and do some
serious refactoring in that area.
And that's kinda what I
specialize in a bit with
the book is I'm trying
to go and break dependencies
in ways that are very
conservative. So you, they feel
like you aren't really breaking
the applications behavior, right? And
then you're able to go
and write tests against that.
And with those tests, get
a lot more confidence that
you can start to refactor
and, and make, you know,
some really nice structural changes
in the code that make
your maintenance easier. Hi, it's
Scott here from another place
in time. I hope you're
enjoying the show so far.
I apologize for interrupting it,
but I wanted to let
you know that assembling a
podcast like this every week,
isn't free. Certainly the bandwidth
bill crushes us every month.
So I want to let
you know that this show
is sponsored by Tellerik. They
make the show possible and
it makes it pretty cool
products as well. For example,
if you're trying to build
a web 2.0 Ajax application,
trying to use the web
1.0 components, it's kind of
difficult. You got to get
the next gen stuff. If
you want to build the
next gen websites. And that's
exactly what the folks at
Telarc have got and their
new upcoming product, which is
code named rad controls. Prometheus's,
it's a big pack of
web controls built entirely on
top of the Microsoft ASP
net Ajax stuff that you
already understand. It's going to
give you a lot of
performance interactivity on your next
project. They mirror the ASP
net Ajax API. So the
development's really straightforward client scripture's
shared loading time is pretty
fast set a couple of
properties. You can even bind
to web services for really
efficient operation. The new rad
editor for ASP at Ajax
loads up to four times
faster than before. And the
rad grid will do thousands
of records in milliseconds. But
of course, it's, it's better
to try these things for
yourself. So you can visit
dot com slash ASP,
net Ajax, and download a
trial. Thanks a lot for
listening and we'll get right
back to the show. So
maybe I could ask you
a question about, I was
on site recently at a,
at a large company that
had a legacy system and
the legacy system was in
C plus plus. And it
was probably, gosh, maybe almost
15 years old, but it
worked and it worked great,
but it was legacy. It
was legacy because it wasn't
on the new shiny interfaces
and whatnot. Yeah, it worked.
And they had people actively
adding to the system, but
it was what I would
call in. I don't know
if this, I invent, I
think I invented this. Maybe
I invented it in the
case of, I pulled it
out of my butt. I
have this caste system in
my mind for API APIs,
third class API APIs. Like
the ones that were written
in the early nineties were
always dot, execute, or dot,
do it for dot master,
whatever. And you pass in
a magic string and maybe
it's tag value pairs or
SQL, but it's something that
the language that you're writing
can't see right. At some
custom thing. And these are
often in large systems that
were, multi-tiered the only thing
that we could easily Marshall
across the strings strengths. So
they pass tag value pairs
around, and that was a
third class interface. And then
like a second class interface
might be something like a
data set, which is a
structure that organizes. These are
a hash table or a
dictionary, right. Still not first
class. And then a first
class is like a proper
interface. We ended up building
over the course of a
week, a prototype that was
a kind of a, a
series of layers on top
of this onion via the
hope being that we would,
we would create data transfer
objects that look closer and
closer the way we wish
they looked as they got
out towards the outside to
the service layer. And then
in the future, we would
remove the core of this
onion and replace it with
something better. Yeah. Is that
a, It is it's reasonable,
you know? Cause you, you
are, you know, you're keeping
the whole thing running while
going and building a parallel
structure that you're going to
use to eventually replace something
there. So it's, it's not
quite the same as the
stringer stringer application thing, but
it is a very common
strategy for large refactorings to
do that sort of thing.
Okay. Well that's good. Yeah.
See, I was only going
partially through your book at
the time, so I hadn't
completed it. Yeah. I know.
No problem. But yeah, it's
yeah. That's a decent strategy
with this sort of thing.
Okay. Well, that's comforting. It
is a weird thing though,
to notice that for very
old applications, you know, I
feel like for some of
them you often have multiple
ways of doing things to
just end up going existing.
You know, it's kind of
like you, you look around
and you can say, Oh,
you know, man invented fire
here, you know? And I
was like, Oh man, discovered
wheel here. You know? And
just, you find the entire
history of 15 years of
software development stuck in one
code base. Do you enumerate
the different techniques for working
with legacy code that you
have, like any friendly mnemonics
or something like that? Yeah.
No, not really. I mean,
one of them is just
like a modification of the
test driven development cycle. I
mean, the typical thing with
test driven development is to
say, you know, first thing
you do is you write
a failing test case and
then you make it compile.
Then you make it pass.
And then you refactor, I
add a secondary, another step
to this, which is basically
first thing you do is
you break dependencies. Okay. You
want to break dependencies and
where to go and get
the tests in place in
order to go and write
the test and refactor underneath
it. That's really interesting because
that's funny. One of the
things that we found with
in this legacy system we
were working on was that
it had a dependency in
this case, on, on IIS,
on internet, on the internet
information server, the windows web
server that was profound. So
we decided to spend the
first day mocking away IIS,
basically making a test harness
to lie to this old
system. And once we did
that, we realized that now
we can start writing tests.
Yeah, No, I mean, it's
great. The thing that you
realize after doing this a
lot, it's kind of like
most applications are really glued
together. It's like they have
hard-coded, you know, dependencies upon
singletons and upon, you know,
third party, API APIs and
all this other stuff that
you can't really mock out
and you really need to
be able to mock those
things out and where to
go and test some things
in isolation. You know, it's
just really painful. Do you
want to have to go
and have IAS running in
the database, running and all
this other stuff and build
your own little world just
to want and run some
simple tests it takes too
long to do. And you
never really get the benefit
of quick feedback from testing.
The, you really need, It's
a good idea to write
lots of tests around a
legacy system, so you can
make sure that it works
the way you think it
works. Yeah. It's a good
idea that, I mean, this
is a first step is
do you want to try
to write tests around stuff
that describe it? I call
this characterization testing. You want
to characterize the behavior so
that you can refactor underneath
it. You can add new
functionality and find out whether
it's compatible with the old
functionality. The thing I always
like to go and underscore
though, is that you shouldn't
really approach this and say,
well, I want to write
tests for everything because for
any large application, you know,
you could spend your entire
career going through writing tests
for all this stuff. What
you want to be able
to do is develop the
skill to go and do
this on a spot basis.
You wanna be able to
go and say, okay, well,
look, you know, I want
to change code here. So
where do I have to
write my tests? I already
go and get a bit
of coverage just to go
and kind of understand as
I'm working with this code,
you know, as I'm trying
to make it better, as
I'm trying to go and
add features to it, that
I'm not breaking anything Interesting.
We ended up calling this
fear-based testing. That's good. Right.
We write tests around those
sections that we were the
most afraid of. Yeah. You
know, it's like, okay, I'm
going in. All right, well,
let's hang on. You know,
if I'm going to get
your back, I'm going to
need tests in order to
feel not afraid. It's good.
And I think there's a
level beyond that too, which
is kind of cool. It's
like, you're not scared anymore.
And you have the support
to be able to get
tests in place. You've broken
dependencies. The step beyond that
is going to have curiosity
based testing and people are
quite often they're, you know,
they often ask the question.
It's like, how many tests
do I need? And I,
I really don't like to
rely on coverage numbers all
that much. You know, I
think coverage is a decent
metric, but what I really
want is the situation where
people can say, look, I
don't quite understand how this
little piece of code works
instead of going and trying
to hunt through and read
all through the code and
try to figure out a
mental model that how it
works, what they can do
is to just write a
test. Right. And they can
write that test to go
and say, Oh, okay, now
I've seen, I apply these
inputs and it does this
for me. And the cool
thing with the test though,
is that those tests remained
in the code base. You
can look at these tests
and use them to go
and really understand how pieces
work intimately. And that just
makes it, makes everything feedback
driven. It makes everything just
exploratory and really much more
pleasant. It's funny, there's, there's
so many different words that
you could put in front
of hyphen based testing, you
know, comfort based testing from
my point of view, anything
that you can do that
makes it easier for you
to sleep at night. Yes,
definitely. If it didn't, you
know, Good thing. Yeah. I
think at the end of
the day with all this,
this is all about making
developer's lives easier. And you
know, the cool thing is
you make developers lives easier
and it's good for the
business also because you can
end up having, you know,
faster feature development and you
know, a more maintainable system.
Exactly. You know, so, so
lots of people have, have
legacy issues, but at the
same time, you've got these
systems that you want to
maintain, but you need, you,
you need, or you want
to get involved in the
new stuff. And I've got
this archetype that I've used
a number of times on
the show, and I've actually
got a buddy in a
who, who lives in this
area of the country. Who
always laughs when I use
this and I say, I've
got this guy, I call
him the chief architect of
the Nebraska department of forestry.
And it was a silly
archetype that I threw out
a while back. But I'm
realizing it's more interesting than
I thought, because here's a
guy, who's got an important
job if a small job,
but he's got legacy systems
that people are counting on
he's he matters his systems
matter, but he's an alpha
geek. He wants to get
involved in the new stuff.
Maybe he's running access databases
from 20 years ago, but
he's, he's smart enough to
understand what he's missing. How
can he use some of
these techniques to get, you
know, make sure that he's
meeting his job's needs and
his constituencies needs while still
getting involved in the new
technology. Yeah, it's a great
question. And I think it
comes back to something which
is kind of interesting that
I ask every once in
a while when I visit
teams, it's like, when's the
last time you wrote a
new class. Right. And it's
funny because in some places
it's like, people don't really
write new classes all that.
Often they just go and
add code into existing methods.
You know, they add methods
on existing classes because they
kind of feel like they're,
they're in maintenance and design
is over. I think that's
one of the worst mistakes
you can make in software
development is to feel the
design is over. It's really
a continual process. And, and
even in the older systems,
you should be creating new
functions and creating new classes.
So, you know, the rule
of thumb don't stop. Yeah.
Don't stop design. I mean,
design is a continual process
of examination and reexamination and
evaluation and Got some system
in VB six. Should I
be still developing in VB
six? And You've got to
make a change, you know,
make a decision. You may
want to go and move
to vb.net or move to
C-sharp or something along those
lines. But even if you
stay in VB six, you've
got to recognize that all
the choices you're making are
really designed decisions and that
you should try to go
in and use, you know,
good principals and make good
evaluations and do good things.
No though, but I'm thinking
about it again with fear.
I don't want to ma
I don't want to mess
it up. I don't want
to break it. You know,
it's one of those things
where if you, if you
haven't gotten to the build
deploy cycle, if you've fallen
out of even for six
months, even a six month
old or even a three
month old system, I may
be afraid to, to deploy
it for, for the sense
that I might, I don't
know, make the gods angry.
One thing to point out
though, is it's like if
you're scared of making changes
in a big, long method,
right. And that's, you know,
it really is a very
scary thing. Some changes that
you make can be articulated
as new methods, right? You
can go ahead and say,
look, let me create a
new method. Let me go
and delegate from the big
old method to this new
method. And what's cool about
that is that you have
a new context, right? This
is a completely different new
context. You can pass, you
know, pass variables in and
write code that, you know,
that just, you know, deals
with those particular parameters and,
and do it using test
driven development, which is a
great thing for your, you
know, your architect to do.
I mean, you want to
get into something which is
new TTD has been around
for quite a while, but
for many people it's new,
right? Practicing test driven development
is a wonderful, you know,
new and wonderful practice. And
you can build up new
things in the context of
old systems. And, you know,
really, if you can delegate
out to something else and
build it up as a
new structure, that's a, a
very valuable thing to do
in the context of old
code. I'd be interested if
there are people in who
are listening, who are maybe
using older systems, maybe older
versions of Fox pro or
older versions of Phoebe who
have written test harnesses. Like,
is there a VB six
test system? Yeah. Yeah. And
I I'm, I hope it's
still there, but there's, there's
a XP programming website by
Ron Jeffries that contains a
list of all of the
variations of the X unit
testing framework. Okay. And, you
know, we call it X
unit, even though there's like,
there's actually like a brand
X unit now, but like
everything which is basically adopting
the same architecture that J
unit did, it was one
of the very first early
testing frameworks. There's CVP unit
there's end unit. There's, you
know, there's after unit for,
for, for Tran, you know,
every language you can imagine.
Yes. It really are. So
it's, it's just a matter
of going into a little
bit of digging, but know,
chances are the language you're
working in has a, there's
an H unit for Haskell.
It's funny. I, I date
myself by coming back to
VB six. I actually had
to start, I started in,
in C and C plus
plus, but I didn't think
about unit testing back then.
This is like, you know,
89 90 in that area.
And then  came along.
But for, For me, the
fat part of the bell
curve was VB six of
the, of the bell curve
of my career. So I
think about like, and that's
when I really got a
lot done, a lot of
really crappy stuff. God helped
the people who have those
things that I wrote. But
yeah, it'd be interesting to
go back and instrument that
code and get that, that,
that, that the same feeling
that I get with unit
testing today. Yeah. And the
feeling of productivity I had
at that time and combine
those things. It's very possible.
I know teams are working
in Delphi and they're basically
doing unit testing and I
mean, early Delphi, as opposed
to the later.net stuff. And
I was so productive and
early. Great. Yeah, no, it's
a cool language. It's a
bit different, a bit off
the mainstream because it's a
passcode river. Where do you
find yourself writing code in
or you in all systems?
I mean, you consult, I'm
a consultant. Then I go
around to many different teams.
The thing that I find
rather interesting, it's what I'm
called in quite often now
for CNC plus plus teams.
And the main reason I
think is because the problems
are harder, you know, the
particularly in C plus plus
it's like the work that
it takes to go on
break dependencies, to get tests
in places really kind of
tough. The language wasn't really
engineered for that sort of
thing. It's really interesting. The
system I was working on
last last week was a
plus plus system. And we
had some situations where they
had a specific compiler and
a specific version of the
compiler exports were certain way.
They were memory model things.
They'd replaced the memory manager.
Yeah. The, you can't just
go and say, Hey, compile
it. Yeah. You had to
set up the build environment.
And that in itself was
a task. It's really tough.
And I think the thing
that I really hope for
most teams that are out
there now that are working
with, you know, current technologies
that they do is try
to maintain the upgrade chain,
try to upgrade your language
periodically and, you know, try
to upgrade your libraries. You
know, it's terrible when you
visit teams and they're like
three or four versions behind
because you know, the, the
more versions you fall behind,
the harder it is to
go and catch up again.
And you really just pull
yourself out of the path
of a lot of goodness.
Right. And you're not necessarily
upgrading just because it's new
and shiny. No, but just
basically to keep yourself in
the path of new tools,
some new technologies and stuff
like that, it's not the
worst thing in the world
to go and fall completely
behind on some of these
things. You can still do
some cool stuff, but it's
just so simple to upgrade.
I mean, it's, it's, it's
a great discipline to go
and keep upgrading because you
deal with different change cases
and then basically increases the
robustness of your code. Yeah.
Well, it looks like we've
got to get going because
we've got to go to
another session right now here
at Norwegian developer's conference. I
really appreciate you sitting down
and thanks a lot. It's
been great. Really good conversation.
Check out my professor's book,
working effectively with legacy code.
And this has been another
episode of Hansel minutes. I'll
see you again next week.